 Proponents of anarchism ( known as " anarchists " ) advocate stateless societies as the only moral form of social organization . Overview There are many types and traditions of anarchism , not all of which are mutually exclusive . Anarchist schools of thought can differ fundamentally , supporting anything from extreme individualism to complete collectivism . Anarchism is often considered to be a radical left-wing ideology , and much of anarchist economics and anarchist legal philosophy reflect anti-statist interpretations of communism , collectivism , syndicalism or participatory economics . However , anarchism has always included an individualist strain supporting a market economy and private property , or morally unrestrained egoism . Some individualist anarchists are also socialists or communists while some anarcho-communists are also individualists or egoists while some anarcho-communists are also individualists . Anarchism as a social movement has regularly endured fluctuations in popularity . The central tendency of anarchism as a mass social movement has been represented by anarcho-communism and anarcho-syndicalism , with individualist anarchism being primarily a literary phenomenon which nevertheless did have an impact on the bigger currents and individualists also participated in large anarchist organizations . Most anarchists oppose all forms of aggression , supporting self-defense or non-violence ( anarcho-pacifism ) , while others have supported the use of some coercive measures , including violent revolution and propaganda of the deed , on the path to an anarchist society . Etymology and terminology The term , " Ideas on Liberty , " May , 1955. its use as a synonym is still common outside the United States . Accordingly , " libertarian socialism " is sometimes used as a synonym for socialist anarchism , to distinguish it from " individualist libertarianism " ( individualist anarchism ) . On the other hand , some use " libertarianism " to refer to individualistic free-market philosophy only , referring to free-market anarchism as " libertarian anarchism " . History Origins The earliest and in later centuries by Zhuangzi and Bao Jingyan . Zhuangzi , specifically , was called by economist Ludwig von Mises as " the first anarchist in the history of human thought " . Zhuangzi wrote , " A petty thief is put in jail . A great brigand becomes a ruler of a Nation , " while Bao Jingyan said that as soon as " the relationship between lord and subject is established , hearts become daily filled with evil designs , until the manacled criminals sullenly doing forced labour in the mud and the dust are full of mutinous thoughts . " Diogenes of Sinope and the Cynics , their contemporary Zeno of Citium , the founder of Stoicism , also introduced similar topics . The term " anarchist " first entered the English language in 1642 , during the English Civil War , as a term of abuse , used by Royalists against their Roundhead opponents . in opposition to Jacobin centralisation of power , seeing " revolutionary government " as oxymoronic . From this climate William Godwin developed what many consider the first expression of modern anarchist thought . Benjamin Tucker instead credits Josiah Warren , an American who promoted stateless and voluntary communities where all goods and services were private , with being " the first man to expound and formulate the doctrine now known as Anarchism . " The first to describe himself as an anarchist was Pierre-Joseph Proudhon , a French philosopher and politician , which led some to call him the founder of modern anarchist theory . The anarcho-communist Joseph Déjacque was the first person to describe himself as " libertarian " . Unlike Proudhon , he argued that , " it is not the product of his or her labor that the worker has a right to , but to the satisfaction of his or her needs , whatever may be their nature . " Jesus is sometimes considered the first anarchist in the Christian anarchist tradition . Georges Lechartier wrote that " The true founder of anarchy was Jesus Christ and ... the first anarchist society was that of the apostles . " Such a distinction reverberates subversive religious conceptions like the aforementioned seemingly anarchistic Taoist teachings and that of other anti-authoritarian religious traditions creating a complex relationship regarding the question as to whether or not anarchism and religion are compatible . This is exemplified when the glorification of the state is viewed as a form of sinful idolatry . The First International In Europe , harsh reaction followed the revolutions of 1848 , during which ten countries had experienced brief or long-term social upheaval as groups carried out nationalist uprisings . After most of these attempts at systematic change ended in failure , conservative elements took advantage of the divided groups of socialists , anarchists , liberals , and nationalists , to prevent further revolt . In 1864 the International Workingmen 's Association ( sometimes called the " First International " ) united diverse revolutionary currents including French followers of Proudhon , Blanquists , Philadelphes , English trade unionists , socialists and social democrats . Due to its links to active workers ' movements , the International became a significant organization . Karl Marx became a leading figure in the International and a member of its General Council . Proudhon 's followers , the mutualists , opposed Marx 's state socialism , advocating political abstentionism and small property holdings . In 1868 , following their unsuccessful participation in the League of Peace and Freedom ( LPF ) , Russian revolutionary Mikhail Bakunin and his collectivist anarchist associates joined the First International ( which had decided not to get involved with the LPF ) . They allied themselves with the federalist socialist sections of the International , who advocated the revolutionary overthrow of the state and the collectivization of property . At first , the collectivists worked with the Marxists to push the First International in a more revolutionary socialist direction . Subsequently , the International became polarised into two camps , with Marx and Bakunin as their respective figureheads . Bakunin characterised Marx 's ideas as centralist and predicted that , if a Marxist party came to power , its leaders would simply take the place of the ruling class they had fought against . In 1872 , the conflict climaxed with a final split between the two groups at the Hague Congress , where Bakunin and James Guillaume were expelled from the International and its headquarters were transferred to New York . In response , the federalist sections formed their own International at the St. Imier Congress , adopting a revolutionary anarchist program . Organised labour The anti-authoritarian sections of the First International were the precursors of the anarcho-syndicalists , seeking to " replace the privilege and authority of the State " with the " free and spontaneous organization of labor . " In 1886 , the Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions ( FOTLU ) of the United States and Canada unanimously set 1 May 1886 , as the date by which the eight-hour work day would become standard . The next day , 4 May , anarchists staged a rally at Chicago 's Haymarket Square . A bomb was thrown by an unknown party near the conclusion of the rally , killing an officer . In the ensuing panic , police opened fire on the crowd and each other . Seven police officers and at least four workers were killed . Eight anarchists directly and indirectly related to the organisers of the rally were arrested and charged with the murder of the deceased officer . The men became international political celebrities among the labour movement . Four of the men were executed and a fifth committed suicide prior to his own execution . The incident became known as the Haymarket affair , and was a setback for the labour movement and the struggle for the eight hour day . In 1890 a second attempt , this time international in scope , to organise for the eight hour day was made . The event also had the secondary purpose of memorializing workers killed as a result of the Haymarket affair . Although it had initially been conceived as a once-off event , by the following year the celebration of International Workers ' Day on May Day had become firmly established as an international worker 's holiday . In 1907 , the International Anarchist Congress of Amsterdam gathered delegates from 14 different countries , among which important figures of the anarchist movement , including Errico Malatesta , Pierre Monatte , Luigi Fabbri , Benoît Broutchoux , Emma Goldman , Rudolf Rocker , and Christiaan Cornelissen . Various themes were treated during the Congress , in particular concerning the organisation of the anarchist movement , popular education issues , the general strike or antimilitarism . A central debate concerned the relation between anarchism and syndicalism ( or trade unionism ) . Malatesta and Monatte were in particular disagreement themselves on this issue , as the latter thought that syndicalism was revolutionary and would create the conditions of a social revolution , while Malatesta did not consider syndicalism by itself sufficient . He thought that the trade-union movement was reformist and even conservative , citing as essentially bourgeois and anti-worker the phenomenon of professional union officials . Malatesta warned that the syndicalists aims were in perpetuating syndicalism itself , whereas anarchists must always have anarchy as their end and consequently refrain from committing to any particular method of achieving it . The Spanish Workers Federation in 1881 was the first major anarcho-syndicalist movement ; anarchist trade union federations were of special importance in Spain . The most successful was the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo ( National Confederation of Labour : CNT ) , founded in 1910. Before the 1940s , the CNT was the major force in Spanish working class politics , attracting 1.58 million members at one point and playing a major role in the Spanish Civil War . The CNT was affiliated with the International Workers Association , a federation of anarcho-syndicalist trade unions founded in 1922 , with delegates representing two million workers from 15 countries in Europe and Latin America . In Latin America in particular " The anarchists quickly became active in organizing craft and industrial workers throughout South and Central America , and until the early 1920s most of the trade unions in Mexico , Brazil , Peru , Chile , and Argentina were anarcho-syndicalist in general outlook ; the prestige of the Spanish C. N. T. as a revolutionary organization was undoubtedly to a great extent responsible for this situation . The largest and most militant of these organizations was the Federación Obrera Regional Argentina ... it grew quickly to a membership of nearly a quarter of a million , which dwarfed the rival socialdemocratic unions . " By the 1880s , the slogan " propaganda of the deed " had begun to be used both within and outside of the anarchist movement to refer to individual bombings , regicides and tyrannicides . From 1905 onwards , the Russian counterparts of these anti-syndicalist anarchist-communists become partisans of economic terrorism and illegal ‘ was the most famous group to embrace illegalism . However , as soon as 1887 , important figures in the anarchist movement distanced themselves from such individual acts . Peter Kropotkin thus wrote that year in Le Révolté that " a structure based on centuries of history cannot be destroyed with a few kilos of dynamite " . A variety of anarchists advocated the abandonment of these sorts of tactics in favor of collective revolutionary action , for example through the trade union movement . The anarcho-syndicalist , Fernand Pelloutier , argued in 1895 for renewed anarchist involvement in the labor movement on the basis that anarchism could do very well without " the individual dynamiter . " State repression ( including the infamous 1894 French lois scélérates ) of the anarchist and labor movements following the few successful bombings and assassinations may have contributed to the abandonment of these kinds of tactics , although reciprocally state repression , in the first place , may have played a role in these isolated acts . The dismemberment of the French socialist movement , into many groups and , following the suppression of the 1871 Paris Commune , the execution and exile of many communards to penal colonies , favored individualist political expression and acts . Numerous heads of state were assassinated between 1881 and 1914 by members of the anarchist movement . For example , U. S. President McKinley 's assassin Leon Czolgosz claimed to have been influenced by anarchist and feminist Emma Goldman . Bombings were associated in the media with anarchists because international terrorism arose during this time period with the widespread distribution of dynamite . This image remains to this day . Propaganda of the deed was abandoned by the vast majority of the anarchist movement after World War I ( 1914–1918 ) and the 1917 October Revolution . Russian Revolution and other uprisings of the 1910s Anarchists participated alongside the Bolsheviks in both February and October revolutions , and were initially enthusiastic about the Bolshevik revolution . However , the Bolsheviks soon turned against the anarchists and other left-wing opposition , a conflict that culminated in the 1921 Kronstadt rebellion which the new government repressed . Anarchists in central Russia were either imprisoned , driven underground or joined the victorious Bolsheviks ; the anarchists from Petrograd and Moscow fled to the Ukraine . There , in the Free Territory , they fought in the civil war against the Whites ( a grouping of monarchists and other opponents of the October Revolution ) and then the Bolsheviks as part of the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine led by Nestor Makhno , who established an anarchist society in the region for a number of months . Expelled American anarchists Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman were amongst those agitating in response to Bolshevik policy and the suppression of the Kronstadt uprising , before they left Russia . Both wrote accounts of their experiences in Russia , criticizing the amount of control the Bolsheviks exercised . For them , Bakunin 's predictions about the consequences of Marxist rule that the rulers of the new " socialist " Marxist state would become a new elite had proved all too true . The victory of the Bolsheviks in the October Revolution and the resulting Russian Civil War did serious damage to anarchist movements internationally . Many workers and activists saw Bolshevik success as setting an example ; Communist parties grew at the expense of anarchism and other socialist movements . In France and the United States , for example , members of the major syndicalist movements of the CGT and IWW left the organizations and joined the Communist International . The revolutionary wave of 1917–23 saw the active participation of anarchists in varying degrees of protagonism . In the German uprising known as the Bavarian Soviet Republic the anarchists Gustav Landauer , Silvio Gesell and Erich Mühsam had important leadership positions within the revolutionary councilist structures . In the Italian events known as the biennio rosso the anarcho-syndicalist trade union Unione Sindacale Italiana " grew to 800,000 members and the influence of the Italian Anarchist Union ( 20,000 members plus Umanita Nova , its daily paper ) grew accordingly ... Anarchists were the first to suggest occupying workplaces . In the Mexican Revolution the Mexican Liberal Party was established and during the early 1910s it lead a series of military offensives leading to the conquest and occupation of certain towns and districts in Baja California with the leadership of anarcho-communist Ricardo Flores Magón . In Paris , the Dielo Truda group of Russian anarchist exiles , which included Nestor Makhno , concluded that anarchists needed to develop new forms of organisation in response to the structures of Bolshevism . Their 1926 manifesto , called the Organizational Platform of the General Union of Anarchists ( Draft ) , was supported . Platformist groups active today include the Workers Solidarity Movement in Ireland and the North Eastern Federation of Anarchist Communists of North America . Synthesis anarchism emerged as an organizational alternative to platformism which tries to join anarchists of different tendencies under the principles of anarchism without adjectives . In the 1920s this form found as its main proponents Volin and Sebastien Faure . The veteran Italian anarchist , Luigi Fabbri , was one of the first critical theorists of fascism , describing it as " the preventive counter-revolution . " http://robertgraham.wordpress.com/anarchism-a-documentary-history-of-libertarian-ideas-volume-one-from-anarchy-to-anarchism-300ce-1939/ In France , where the far right leagues came close to insurrection in the February 1934 riots , anarchists divided over a united front policy . In Spain , the CNT initially refused to join a popular front electoral alliance , and abstention by CNT supporters led to a right wing election victory . But in 1936 , the CNT changed its policy and anarchist votes helped bring the popular front back to power . Months later , the former ruling class responded with an attempted coup causing the Spanish Civil War ( 1936–1939 ) . In response to the army rebellion , an anarchist-inspired movement of peasants and workers , supported by armed militias , took control of Barcelona and of large areas of rural Spain where they collectivised the land . But even before the fascist victory in 1939 , the anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the Stalinists , who controlled the distribution of military aid to the Republican cause from the Soviet Union . Stalinist-led troops suppressed the collectives and persecuted both dissident Marxists and anarchists . Anarchists in France and Italy were active in the Resistance during World War II . Post-war years . Anarchism continued to be influential in important literary and intellectual personalities of the time such as Albert Camus , Herbert Read , Paul Goodman , Dwight Macdonald , Allen Ginsberg , Julian Beck and the French Surrealist group led by André Breton which now openly embraced anarchism and collaborated in the Fédération Anarchiste . Anarcho-pacifism became influential in the Anti-nuclear movement and anti war movements of the time as can be seen in the activism and writings of the English anarchist member of Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament Alex Comfort or the similar activism of the American catholic anarcho-pacifist Ammon Hennacy . Anarcho-pacifism became a " basis for a critique of militarism on both sides of the Cold War . " The resurgence of anarchist ideas during this period is well documented in Robert Graham 's , Volume Two : The Emergence of the New Anarchism ( 1939-1977 ) . In the United Kingdom in the 1970s this was associated with the punk rock movement , as exemplified by bands such as Crass and the Sex Pistols . The housing and employment crisis in most of Western Europe led to the formation of communes and squatter movements like that of Barcelona , Spain . In Denmark , squatters occupied a disused military base and declared the Freetown Christiania , an autonomous haven in central Copenhagen . Since the revival of anarchism in the mid 20th century , a number of new movements and schools of thought emerged . Although feminist tendencies have always been a part of the anarchist movement in the form of anarcha-feminism , they returned with vigour during the second wave of feminism in the 1960s . The American Civil Rights Movement and the movement against the war in Vietnam also contributed to the revival of North American anarchism . European anarchism of the late 20th century drew much of its strength from the labour movement , and both have incorporated animal rights activism . Anarchist anthropologist David Graeber and anarchist historian Andrej Grubacic have posited a rupture between generations of anarchism , with those " who often still have not shaken the sectarian habits " of the 19th century contrasted with the younger activists who are " much more informed , among other elements , by indigenous , feminist , ecological and cultural-critical ideas " , and who by the turn of the 21st century formed " by far the majority " of anarchists . Around the turn of the 21st century , anarchism grew in popularity and influence as part of the anti-war , anti-capitalist , and anti-globalisation movements . Anarchists became known for their involvement in protests against the meetings of the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) , Group of Eight , and the World Economic Forum . Some anarchist factions at these protests engaged in rioting , property destruction , and violent confrontations with police . These actions were precipitated by ad hoc , leaderless , anonymous cadres known as black blocs ; other organisational tactics pioneered in this time include security culture , affinity groups and the use of decentralised technologies such as the internet . Other active syndicalist movements include in Sweden the Central Organisation of the Workers of Sweden and the Swedish Anarcho-syndicalist Youth Federation ; the CNT-AIT in France ; the Union Sindicale Italiana in Italy ; in the US Workers Solidarity Alliance and the UK Solidarity Federation . The revolutionary industrial unionist Industrial Workers of the World , claiming 2,000 paying members , and the International Workers Association , an anarcho-syndicalist successor to the First International , also remain active . Anarchist schools of thought Anarchist schools of thought had been generally grouped in two main historical traditions , individualist anarchism and social anarchism , which have some different origins , values and evolution . The individualist wing of anarchism emphasises negative liberty , i. e. opposition to state or social control over the individual , while those in the social wing emphasise positive liberty to achieve one 's potential and argue that humans have needs that society ought to fulfill , " recognizing equality of entitlement " . In chronological and theoretical sense there are classical — those created throughout the 19th century — and post-classical anarchist schools — those created since the mid-20th century and after . Beyond the specific factions of anarchist thought is philosophical anarchism , which embodies the theoretical stance that the state lacks moral legitimacy without accepting the imperative of revolution to eliminate it . A component especially of individualist anarchism philosophical anarchism may accept the existence of a minimal state as unfortunate , and usually temporary , " necessary evil " but argue that citizens do not have a moral obligation to obey the state when its laws conflict with individual autonomy . One reaction against sectarianism within the anarchist milieu was " anarchism without adjectives " , a call for toleration first adopted by Fernando Tarrida del Mármol in 1889 in response to the " bitter debates " of anarchist theory at the time . In abandoning the hyphenated anarchisms ( i. e. collectivist- , communist- , mutualist- and individualist-anarchism ) , it sought to emphasise the anti-authoritarian beliefs common to all anarchist schools of thought . Mutualism Mutualism began in 18th century English and French labour movements before taking an anarchist form associated with Pierre-Joseph Proudhon in France and others in the United States . Proudhon proposed spontaneous order , whereby organization emerges without central authority , a " positive anarchy " where order arises when everybody does " what he wishes and only what he wishes " and where " business transactions alone produce the social order . " Mutualist anarchism is concerned with reciprocity , free association , voluntary contract , federation , and credit and currency reform . According to William Batchelder Greene , each worker in the mutualist system would receive " just and exact pay for his work ; services equivalent in cost being exchangeable for services equivalent in cost , without profit or discount . " Mutualism has been retrospectively characterised as ideologically situated between individualist and collectivist forms of anarchism . Proudhon first characterised his goal as a " third form of society , the synthesis of communism and property . " Individualist anarchism Individualist anarchism refers to several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasize the individual and their will over any kinds of external determinants such as groups , society , traditions , and ideological systems . Individualist anarchism is not a single philosophy but refers to a group of individualistic philosophies that sometimes are in conflict . In 1793 , William Godwin , who has often been cited as the first anarchist , wrote Political Justice , which some consider to be the first expression of anarchism . Godwin , a philosophical anarchist , from a rationalist and utilitarian basis opposed revolutionary action and saw a minimal state as a present " necessary evil " that would become increasingly irrelevant and powerless by the gradual spread of knowledge . Godwin advocated individualism , proposing that all cooperation in labour be eliminated on the premise that this would be most conducive with the general good . An influential form of individualist anarchism , called " egoism , " or egoist anarchism , was expounded by one of the earliest and best-known proponents of individualist anarchism , the German Max Stirner . Stirner 's The Ego and Its Own , published in 1844 , is a founding text of the philosophy . without regard for God , state , or morality . To Stirner , rights were spooks in the mind , and he held that society does not exist but " the individuals are its reality " . Stirner advocated self-assertion and foresaw unions of egoists , non-systematic associations continually renewed by all parties ' support through an act of will , which Stirner proposed as a form of organization in place of the state . Egoist anarchists claim that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals . " Egoism " has inspired many interpretations of Stirner 's philosophy . It was re-discovered and promoted by German philosophical anarchist and LGBT activist John Henry Mackay . Josiah Warren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist , and the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833 , The Peaceful Revolutionist , was the first anarchist periodical published , . For American anarchist historian Eunice Minette Schuster " It is apparent ... that Proudhonian Anarchism was to be found in the United States at least as early as 1848 and that it was not conscious of its affinity to the Individualist Anarchism of Josiah Warren and Stephen Pearl Andrews ... William B. Greene presented this Proudhonian Mutualism in its purest and most systematic form . " . Henry David Thoreau ( 1817–1862 ) was an important early influence in individualist anarchist thought in the United States and Europe . Thoreau was an American author , poet , naturalist , tax resister , development critic , surveyor , historian , philosopher , and leading transcendentalist . He is best known for his books Walden , a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings , and his essay , Civil Disobedience , an argument for individual resistance to civil government in moral opposition to an unjust state . Later Benjamin Tucker fused Stirner´s egoism with the economics of Warren and Proudhon in his eclectic influential publication Liberty . From these early influences individualist anarchism in different countries attracted a small but diverse following of bohemian artists and intellectuals , free love and birth control advocates ( see Anarchism and issues related to love and sex ) , individualist naturists nudists ( see anarcho-naturism ) , freethought and anti-clearical activists as well as young anarchist outlaws in what came to be known as illegalism and individual reclamation Social anarchism rejects private property , seeing it as a source of social inequality , and emphasises cooperation and mutual aid . Collectivist anarchism , also referred to as " revolutionary socialism " or a form of such , is a revolutionary form of anarchism , commonly associated with Mikhail Bakunin and Johann Most . Collectivist anarchists oppose all private ownership of the means of production , instead advocating that ownership be collectivised . This was to be achieved through violent revolution , first starting with a small cohesive group through acts of violence , or " propaganda by the deed " , which would inspire the workers as a whole to revolt and forcibly collectivise the means of production . Collectivist anarchism arose contemporaneously with Marxism but opposed the Marxist dictatorship of the proletariat , despite the stated Marxist goal of a collectivist stateless society . Anarchist , communist and collectivist ideas are not mutually exclusive ; although the collectivist anarchists advocated compensation for labour , some held out the possibility of a post-revolutionary transition to a communist system of distribution according to need . Anarcho-communism developed out of radical socialist currents after the French revolution but was first formulated as such in the Italian section of the First International . The theoretical work of Peter Kropotkin and Errico Malatesta took importance later as it expanded and developed pro-organizationalist and insurrectionary anti-organizationalist sections . Anarchist communism proposes that the freest form of social organisation would be a society composed of self-managing communes with collective use of the means of production , organised democratically , and related to other communes through federation . While some anarchist communists favour direct democracy , others feel that its majoritarianism can impede individual liberty and favour consensus democracy instead . In anarchist communism , as money would be abolished , individuals would not receive direct compensation for labour ( through sharing of profits or payment ) but would have free access to the resources and surplus of the commune . Anarchist communism does not always have a communitarian philosophy . Some forms of anarchist communism such as insurrectionary anarchism are egoist and strongly influenced by radical individualism , believing anarcho-communism is the best social system for the realization of individual freedom . Most anarcho-communists view anarcho-communism as a way of reconciling the opposition between the individual and society . In the early 20th century , anarcho-syndicalism arose as a distinct school of thought within anarchism . With greater focus on the labour movement than previous forms of anarchism , syndicalism posits radical trade unions as a potential force for revolutionary social change , replacing capitalism and the state with a new society , democratically self-managed by the workers . It is often combined with other branches of anarchism , and anarcho-syndicalists often subscribe to anarchist communist or collectivist anarchist economic systems . An early leading anarcho-syndicalist thinker was Rudolf Rocker , whose 1938 pamphlet Anarchosyndicalism outlined a view of the movement 's origin , aims and importance to the future of labour . Post-classical currents Anarchism continues to generate many philosophies and movements , at times eclectic , drawing upon various sources , and syncretic , combining disparate and contrary concepts to create new philosophical approaches . Since the revival of anarchism in the United States in the 1960s , Anarcho-capitalism developed from radical anti-state libertarianism and individualist anarchism , drawing from Austrian School economics , study of law and economics and public choice theory , while the burgeoning feminist and environmentalist movements also produced anarchist offshoots . Anarcha-feminism developed as a synthesis of radical feminism and anarchism that views patriarchy ( male domination over women ) as a fundamental manifestation of compulsory government . It was inspired by the late 19th century writings of early feminist anarchists such as Lucy Parsons , Emma Goldman , Voltairine de Cleyre , and Dora Marsden . Anarcha-feminists , like other radical feminists , criticise and advocate the abolition of traditional conceptions of family , education and gender roles . Green anarchism ( or eco-anarchism ) is a school of thought within anarchism which puts an emphasis on environmental issues , with an important precedent in anarcho-naturism and whose main contemporary currents are anarcho-primitivism and social ecology . Anarcho-pacifism is a tendency which rejects the use of violence in the struggle for social change . Its main proponents included Leo Tolstoy , Dorothy Day , Ammon Hennacy , and Jacques Ellul . Post-left anarchy is a tendency which seeks to distance itself from traditional left-wing politics and to escape the confines of ideology in general . Post-anarchism is a theoretical move towards a synthesis of classical anarchist theory and poststructuralist thought drawing from diverse ideas including post-modernism , autonomist marxism , post-left anarchy , situationism and postcolonialism . Another recent form of anarchism critical of formal anarchist movements is insurrectionary anarchism , which advocates informal organization and active resistance to the state ; its proponents include Wolfi Landstreicher and Alfredo M. Bonanno . Theories Intersecting and overlapping between various schools of thought , certain topics of interest and internal disputes have proven perennial within anarchist theory . Free love An important current within anarchism is free love . Free love advocates sometimes traced their roots back to Josiah Warren and to experimental communities , viewed sexual freedom as a clear , direct expression of an individual 's self-ownership . Free love particularly stressed women 's rights since most sexual laws discriminated against women : for example , marriage laws and anti-birth control measures . but also there existed Ezra Heywood and Angela Heywood 's The Word ( 1872–1890 , 1892–1893 ) . The publication staunchly advocated free love and women 's rights , and critiqued " Comstockery " -- censorship of sexual information . Also M. E. Lazarus was an important American individualist anarchist who promoted free love . and the openly bisexual radical Edna St. Vincent Millay and the lesbian anarchist Margaret Anderson were prominent among them . Discussion groups organised by the Villagers were frequented by Emma Goldman , among others . Magnus Hirschfeld noted in 1923 that Goldman " has campaigned boldly and steadfastly for individual rights , and especially for those deprived of their rights . Thus it came about that she was the first and only woman , indeed the first and only American , to take up the defense of homosexual love before the general public . " In fact , before Goldman , heterosexual anarchist Robert Reitzel ( 1849–1898 ) spoke positively of homosexuality from the beginning of the 1890s in his Detroit-based German language journal Der arme Teufel . In Argentina anarcha-feminist Virginia Bolten published the newspaper called ( ) , which was published nine times in Rosario between 8 January 1896 and 1 January 1897 , and was revived , briefly , in 1901. In Europe the main propagandist of free love within individualist anarchism was Emile Armand . He proposed the concept of la camaraderie amoureuse to speak of free love as the possibility of voluntary sexual encounter between consenting adults . He was also a consistent proponent of polyamory . In the United States " freethought was a basically anti-christian , anti-clerical movement , whose purpose was to make the individual politically and spiritually free to decide for himself on religious matters . A number of contributors to Liberty ( anarchist publication ) were prominent figures in both freethought and anarchism . The individualist anarchist George MacDonald was a co-editor of Freethought and , for a time , The Truth Seeker . E. C. Walker was co-editor of the excellent free-thought / free love journal Lucifer , the Light-Bearer " . The schools ' stated goal was to " educate the working class in a rational , secular and non-coercive setting " . Fiercely anti-clerical , Ferrer believed in " freedom in education " , education free from the authority of church and state . Murray Bookchin wrote : " This period 1890s was the heyday of libertarian schools and pedagogical projects in all areas of the country where Anarchists exercised some degree of influence . Perhaps the best-known effort in this field was Francisco Ferrer 's Modern School ( Escuela Moderna ) , a project which exercised a considerable influence on Catalan education and on experimental techniques of teaching generally . " La Escuela Moderna , and Ferrer 's ideas generally , formed the inspiration for a series of Modern Schools in the United States , Tolstoy 's educational experiments were short-lived due to harassment by the Tsarist secret police . Tolstoy established a conceptual difference between education and culture . Summerhill is often cited as an example of anarchism in practice . However , although Summerhill and other free schools are radically libertarian , they differ in principle from those of Ferrer by not advocating an overtly political class struggle-approach . In addition to organizing schools according to libertarian principles , anarchists have also questioned the concept of schooling per se . The term deschooling was popularized by Ivan Illich , who argued that the school as an institution is dysfunctional for self-determined learning and serves the creation of a consumer society instead . Internal issues and debates Anarchism is a philosophy which embodies many diverse attitudes , tendencies and schools of thought ; as such , disagreement over questions of values , ideology and tactics is common . The compatibility of capitalism , nationalism and religion with anarchism is widely disputed . Similarly , anarchism enjoys complex relationships with ideologies such as Marxism , communism and capitalism . Anarchists may be motivated by humanism , divine authority , enlightened self-interest , veganism or any number of alternative ethical doctrines . Phenomena such as civilization , technology ( e. g. within anarcho-primitivism and insurrectionary anarchism ) , and the democratic process may be sharply criticised within some anarchist tendencies and simultaneously lauded in others . On a tactical level , while propaganda of the deed was a tactic used by anarchists in the 19th century ( e. g. the Nihilist movement ) , some contemporary anarchists espouse alternative direct action methods such as nonviolence , counter-economics and anti-state cryptography to bring about an anarchist society . About the scope of an anarchist society , some anarchists advocate a global one , while others do so by local ones . The diversity in anarchism has led to widely different use of identical terms among different anarchist traditions , which has led to many definitional concerns in anarchist theory . Criticisms Criticisms of anarchism include moral criticisms , practical criticisms which claim that anarchism is unworkable in practice , and the criticism that anarchism could not be maintained .
