 He came out with particularly sensational essays like " Die kurze Geschichte der deutschen Literatur " ( The Short History of German Literature ) . He is married to Hannelore Schlaffer . Life Schlaffer received his first Literary Science Professorship at the Philipp 's University - Marburg and changed to Stuttgart in 1975. He held the teaching position in that town from 1975 until his emeritus in 2004. He published numerous Books , among others about Lyrik im Realismus ( Poetry in Realism ) , Der Bürger als Held ( The Townspeople as Heroes ) , aesthetic histories , Goethe 's Faust , Poesie und Wissen ( Poetry and Knowledge ) , besides scientific writings like essays and literary criticisms in Tageszeitung .  Selected works * Das entfesselte Wort : Nietzsches Stil und seine Folgen ( The Aroused Word : Nietzsche 's Style and his Successors ) . Hanser , München 2007 * Poesie und Wissen : die Entstehung des ästhetischen Bewusstseins und der philologischen Erkenntnis ( Poems and Knowledge : The Origins of Aesthetic Consciousness and the Philosophical Insight ) . Suhrkamp , Frankfurt am Main 2005 * Die kurze Geschichte der deutschen Literatur ( The Short History of German Literature ) . Hanser , München ; Wien 2002 * Faust zweiter Teil : die Allegorie des 19. Jahrhunderts ( Faust Part II : The Allegory of the 19th Century ) . Metzler , Stuttgart 1989 * Der Bürger als Held : sozialgeschichtliche Auflösungen literarischer Widersprüche ( The Townspeople as Heroes : Social-Historical Solutions of Literary Contradictions ) . Suhrkamp , Frankfurt ( am Main ) 1973 * Lyrik im Realismus : Studien über Raum und Zeit in den Gedichten ( Poetry in Realism : Studies about Time and Place in Poems ) Mörikes , the Droste and Liliencrons . - Würzburg 1966 Selected awards * 2008 Heinrich Mann Prize for Essays of the Berliner Akademie der Künste External links * http://dispatch.opac.d-nb.de/DB 4.1/REL ? PPN 12359734X Literature by and on Heinz Schlaffer in the Catalog of the German National Library * http://www.perlentaucher.de/autoren/9180.html Perlentaucher über den Autor , Kurzrezensionen seiner Werke ( Perlentaucher about the Author , Short Review of his Works ) ( German )
