 The name comes from the Latin word for " south " and the Greek name of Asia , hence " South Asia " . Among these languages , only Khmer , Vietnamese , and Mon have a long established recorded history , and only Vietnamese and Khmer have official status ( in Vietnam and Cambodia , respectively ) . The rest of the languages are spoken by minority groups . Ethnologue identifies 168 Austro-Asiatic languages . These are traditionally divided into two families , Mon–Khmer and Munda . Two recent classifications have abandoned Mon–Khmer as a valid node , although this is tentative and not generally accepted . Austro-Asiatic languages have a disjunct distribution across India , Bangladesh and Southeast Asia , separated by regions where other languages are spoken . It is widely believed that the Austro-Asiatic languages are the autochthonous languages of Southeast Asia and the eastern Indian subcontinent , and that the other languages of the region , including the Indo-European , Tai–Kadai , Dravidian , Austronesian , and Sino-Tibetan languages , are the result of later migrations of people . Morphology The Austro-Asiatic languages are well known for having a " sesqui-syllabic " pattern , with basic nouns and verbs consisting of a reduced minor syllable plus a full syllable . Many of them also have infixes . Proto-language Much work has been done on the reconstruction of Proto-Mon–Khmer in Harry L. Shorto 's Mon–Khmer Comparative Dictionary . However , very little work has been done on Proto-Austro-Asiatic itself , since the Munda languages are not well documented . If Mon–Khmer is not a valid taxon , as some recent classifications would have it , then Proto-Mon–Khmer becomes synonymous with Proto-Austro-Asiatic . Sidwell ( 2005 ) reconstructs the consonant inventory of Proto-Mon–Khmer as follows : This is identical to earlier reconstructions except for . is better preserved in the Katuic languages , which Paul Sidwell specializes more in than the other branches of Austro-Asiatic . Classification Linguists traditionally recognize two primary divisions of Austro-Asiatic : the Mon–Khmer languages of Southeast Asia , Northeast India and the Nicobar Islands , and the Munda languages of East and Central India and parts of Bangladesh . However , no evidence for this classification has ever been published . Each of the families that is written in boldface type below is accepted as a valid clade . By contrast , the relationships between these families within Austro-Asiatic is debated . In addition to the traditional classification , two recent proposals are given , neither of which accept traditional " Mon–Khmer " as a valid unit . However , little of the data used for competing classifications has ever been published , and therefore cannot be evaluated by peer review . Gérard Diffloth ( 2005 ) Diffloth compares reconstructions of various clades , and attempts to classify them based on shared innovations , though like other classifications the evidence has not been published . As a schematic , we have : Or in more detail , : : : : : : : : : Korku : : : Kherwarian : 12 languages : * Khasian : 3 languages of eastern India and Bangladesh : : : : : : : : Pakanic or Palyu : 4 or 5 languages of southern China and Vietnam : : : Palaungic : 21 languages of Burma , southern China , and Thailand : : : : : : Vietic : 10 languages of Vietnam and Laos , including the Vietnamese language , which has the most speakers of any Austro-Asiatic language . These are the only Austro-Asiatic languages to have highly developed tone systems . : : : Katuic : 19 languages of Laos , Vietnam , and Thailand . : : : : : * Bahnaric : 40 languages of Vietnam , Laos , and Cambodia . : : : : : : : The Khmer dialects of Cambodia , Thailand , and Vietnam . : : : : Pearic : 6 languages of Cambodia . : : : * Nicobarese languages : 6 languages of the Nicobar Islands , a territory of India . : : : : : Aslian : 19 languages of peninsular Malaysia and Thailand . : : : Monic : 2 languages , the Mon language of Burma and the Nyahkur language of Thailand . This family tree is consistent with recent studies of migration of Y-Chromosomal haplogroup O2b-M95 . However , the dates obtained from DNA studies are several times older than that given by linguists . The route map of the people with haplogroup O2b , speaking this language can be seen in this link . http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/7/47/figure/F1 Ilia Peiros ( 2004 ) Peiros is a lexicostatistic classification , based on percentages of shared vocabulary . This means that a language may appear to be more distantly related than it actually is due to language contact , so it is only a starting point for a proper genealogical classification . * Diffloth ( 1974 ) Diffloth 's widely cited original classification , now abandoned by Diffloth himself , is used in Encyclopædia Britannica and—except for the breakup of Southern Mon–Khmer—in Ethnologue .
