 These signs all begin before a child is three years old . The prevalence of autism is about 1–2 per 1,000 people worldwide ; however , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) reports approximately 9 per 1,000 children in the United States are diagnosed with ASD . and tend to continue through adulthood , although often in more muted form . Unusual social development becomes apparent early in childhood . Autistic infants show less attention to social stimuli , smile and look at others less often , and respond less to their own name . Autistic toddlers differ more strikingly from social norms ; for example , they have less eye contact and turn taking , and do not have the ability to use simple movements to express themselves , such as the deficiency to point at things . Most autistic children display moderately less attachment security than non-autistic children , although this difference disappears in children with higher mental development or less severe ASD . Older children and adults with ASD perform worse on tests of face and emotion recognition . Children with high-functioning autism suffer from more intense and frequent loneliness compared to non-autistic peers , despite the common belief that children with autism prefer to be alone . Making and maintaining friendships often proves to be difficult for those with autism . For them , the quality of friendships , not the number of friends , predicts how lonely they feel . Functional friendships , such as those resulting in invitations to parties , may affect the quality of life more deeply . Communication About a third to a half of individuals with autism do not develop enough natural speech to meet their daily communication needs . Differences in communication may be present from the first year of life , and may include delayed onset of babbling , unusual gestures , diminished responsiveness , and vocal patterns that are not synchronized with the caregiver . In the second and third years , autistic children have less frequent and less diverse babbling , consonants , words , and word combinations ; their gestures are less often integrated with words . Autistic children are less likely to make requests or share experiences , and are more likely to simply repeat others ' words ( echolalia ) for example , they may look at a pointing hand instead of the pointed-at object , In a pair of studies , high-functioning autistic children aged 8–15 performed equally well as , and adults better than , individually matched controls at basic language tasks involving vocabulary and spelling . Both autistic groups performed worse than controls at complex language tasks such as figurative language , comprehension and inference . As people are often sized up initially from their basic language skills , these studies suggest that people speaking to autistic individuals are more likely to overestimate what their audience comprehends . *Restricted behavior is limited in focus , interest , or activity , such as preoccupation with a single television program , toy , or game . *Self-injury includes movements that injure or can injure the person , such as eye poking , skin picking , hand biting , and head banging . Other symptoms Autistic individuals may have symptoms that are independent of the diagnosis , but that can affect the individual or the family . An estimated 0.5 % to 10 % of individuals with ASD show unusual abilities , ranging from splinter skills such as the memorization of trivia to the extraordinarily rare talents of prodigious autistic savants . Many individuals with ASD show superior skills in perception and attention , relative to the general population . Sensory abnormalities are found in over 90 % of those with autism , and are considered core features by some , although there is no good evidence that sensory symptoms differentiate autism from other developmental disorders . Differences are greater for under-responsivity ( for example , walking into things ) than for over-responsivity ( for example , distress from loud noises ) or for sensation seeking ( for example , rhythmic movements ) . An estimated 60%–80 % of autistic people have motor signs that include poor muscle tone , poor motor planning , and toe walking ; Unusual eating behavior occurs in about three-quarters of children with ASD , to the extent that it was formerly a diagnostic indicator . Selectivity is the most common problem , although eating rituals and food refusal also occur ; this does not appear to result in malnutrition . Although some children with autism also have gastrointestinal ( GI ) symptoms , there is a lack of published rigorous data to support the theory that autistic children have more or different GI symptoms than usual ; studies report conflicting results , and the relationship between GI problems and ASD is unclear . Parents of children with ASD have higher levels of stress . Siblings of children with ASD report greater admiration of and less conflict with the affected sibling than siblings of unaffected children or those with Down syndrome ; siblings of individuals with ASD have greater risk of negative well-being and poorer sibling relationships as adults . Classification Autism is one of the five pervasive developmental disorders ( PDD ) , which are characterized by widespread abnormalities of social interactions and communication , and severely restricted interests and highly repetitive behavior . Unlike with autism , people with Asperger syndrome have no substantial delay in language development . whereas autism itself is often called autistic disorder , childhood autism , or infantile autism . In this article , autism refers to the classic autistic disorder ; in clinical practice , though , autism , ASD , and PDD are often used interchangeably . The manifestations of autism cover a wide spectrum , ranging from individuals with severe impairments—who may be silent , mentally disabled , and locked into hand flapping and rocking—to high functioning individuals who may have active but distinctly odd social approaches , narrowly focused interests , and verbose , pedantic communication . Because the behavior spectrum is continuous , boundaries between diagnostic categories are necessarily somewhat arbitrary . or on how much support the individual requires in daily life ; these subdivisions are not standardized and are controversial . Autism can also be divided into syndromal and non-syndromal autism ; the syndromal autism is associated with severe or profound mental retardation or a congenital syndrome with physical symptoms , such as tuberous sclerosis . Although individuals with Asperger syndrome tend to perform better cognitively than those with autism , the extent of the overlap between Asperger syndrome , HFA , and non-syndromal autism is unclear . Some studies have reported diagnoses of autism in children due to a loss of language or social skills , as opposed to a failure to make progress , typically from 15 to 30 months of age . The validity of this distinction remains controversial ; it is possible that regressive autism is a specific subtype , Research into causes has been hampered by the inability to identify biologically meaningful subpopulations and by the traditional boundaries between the disciplines of psychiatry , psychology , neurology and pediatrics . Newer technologies such as fMRI and diffusion tensor imaging can help identify biologically relevant phenotypes ( observable traits ) that can be viewed on brain scans , to help further neurogenetic studies of autism ; one example is lowered activity in the fusiform face area of the brain , which is associated with impaired perception of people versus objects . Causes It has long been presumed that there is a common cause at the genetic , cognitive , and neural levels for autism 's characteristic triad of symptoms . Complexity arises due to interactions among multiple genes , the environment , and epigenetic factors which do not change DNA but are heritable and influence gene expression . Studies of twins suggest that heritability is 0.7 for autism and as high as 0.9 for ASD , and siblings of those with autism are about 25 times more likely to be autistic than the general population . Hence , a substantial fraction of autism cases may be traceable to genetic causes that are highly heritable but not inherited : that is , the mutation that causes the autism is not present in the parental genome . Several lines of evidence point to synaptic dysfunction as a cause of autism . Gene replacement studies in mice suggest that autistic symptoms are closely related to later developmental steps that depend on activity in synapses and on activity-dependent changes . All known teratogens ( agents that cause birth defects ) related to the risk of autism appear to act during the first eight weeks from conception , and though this does not exclude the possibility that autism can be initiated or affected later , it is strong evidence that autism arises very early in development . Although evidence for other environmental causes is anecdotal and has not been confirmed by reliable studies , Environmental factors that have been claimed to contribute to or exacerbate autism , or may be important in future research , include certain foods , infectious disease , heavy metals , solvents , diesel exhaust , PCBs , phthalates and phenols used in plastic products , pesticides , brominated flame retardants , alcohol , smoking , illicit drugs , vaccines , although no links have been found , and some have been completely disproven . Parents may first become aware of autistic symptoms in their child around the time of a routine vaccination . This has led to unsupported theories blaming vaccine " overload " , a vaccine preservative , or the MMR vaccine for causing autism . Although these theories lack convincing scientific evidence and are biologically implausible , Mechanism Autism 's symptoms result from maturation-related changes in various systems of the brain . How autism occurs is not well understood . Its mechanism can be divided into two areas : the pathophysiology of brain structures and processes associated with autism , and the neuropsychological linkages between brain structures and behaviors . The behaviors appear to have multiple pathophysiologies . Autism appears to result from developmental factors that affect many or all functional brain systems , and to disturb the timing of brain development more than the final product . Neuroanatomical studies and the associations with teratogens strongly suggest that autism 's mechanism includes alteration of brain development soon after conception . Just after birth , the brains of autistic children tend to grow faster than usual , followed by normal or relatively slower growth in childhood . It is not known whether early overgrowth occurs in all autistic children . It seems to be most prominent in brain areas underlying the development of higher cognitive specialization . * Disturbed neuronal migration during early gestation . * Unbalanced excitatory–inhibitory networks . or by poorly regulated synthesis of synaptic proteins . Disrupted synaptic development may also contribute to epilepsy , which may explain why the two conditions are associated . Interactions between the immune system and the nervous system begin early during the embryonic stage of life , and successful neurodevelopment depends on a balanced immune response . It is possible that aberrant immune activity during critical periods of neurodevelopment is part of the mechanism of some forms of ASD . Although some abnormalities in the immune system have been found in specific subgroups of autistic individuals , it is not known whether these abnormalities are relevant to or secondary to autism 's disease processes . As autoantibodies are found in conditions other than ASD , and are not always present in ASD , the relationship between immune disturbances and autism remains unclear and controversial . The relationship of neurochemicals to autism is not well understood ; several have been investigated , with the most evidence for the role of serotonin and of genetic differences in its transport . Others have pointed to a role for group I metabotropic glutamate receptors ( mGluR ) in the pathogenesis of one type of autism , Fragile X. Some data suggest an increase in several growth hormones ; other data argue for diminished growth factors . Also , some inborn errors of metabolism are associated with autism but probably account for less than 5 % of cases . Several studies have tested this hypothesis by demonstrating structural abnormalities in MNS regions of individuals with ASD , delay in the activation in the core circuit for imitation in individuals with Asperger syndrome , and a correlation between reduced MNS activity and severity of the syndrome in children with ASD . However , individuals with autism also have abnormal brain activation in many circuits outside the MNS and the MNS theory does not explain the normal performance of autistic children on imitation tasks that involve a goal or object . ASD-related patterns of low function and aberrant activation in the brain differ depending on whether the brain is doing social or nonsocial tasks . In autism there is evidence for reduced functional connectivity of the default network , a large-scale brain network involved in social and emotional processing , with intact connectivity of the task-positive network , used in sustained attention and goal-directed thinking . In people with autism the two networks are not negatively correlated in time , suggesting an imbalance in toggling between the two networks , possibly reflecting a disturbance of self-referential thought . A 2008 brain-imaging study found a specific pattern of signals in the cingulate cortex which differs in individuals with ASD . The underconnectivity theory of autism hypothesizes that autism is marked by underfunctioning high-level neural connections and synchronization , along with an excess of low-level processes . Evidence for this theory has been found in functional neuroimaging studies on autistic individuals and by a brainwave study that suggested that adults with ASD have local overconnectivity in the cortex and weak functional connections between the frontal lobe and the rest of the cortex . Other evidence suggests the underconnectivity is mainly within each hemisphere of the cortex and that autism is a disorder of the association cortex . From studies based on event-related potentials , transient changes to the brain 's electrical activity in response to stimuli , there is considerable evidence for differences in autistic individuals with respect to attention , orientiation to auditory and visual stimuli , novelty detection , language and face processing , and information storage ; several studies have found a preference for non-social stimuli . For example , magnetoencephalography studies have found evidence in autistic children of delayed responses in the brain 's processing of auditory signals . In the genetic area , relations have been found between autism and schizophrenia based on duplications and deletions of chromosomes ; research showed that schizophrenia and autism are significantly more common in combination with 1q21.1 deletion syndrome . Research on autism/schizophrenia relations for chromosome 15 ( 15q13.3 ) , chromosome 16 ( 16p13.1 ) and chromosome 17 ( 17p12 ) are inconclusive . Neuropsychology Two major categories of cognitive theories have been proposed about the links between autistic brains and behavior . The first category focuses on deficits in social cognition . The empathizing–systemizing theory postulates that autistic individuals can systemize—that is , they can develop internal rules of operation to handle events inside the brain—but are less effective at empathizing by handling events generated by other agents . An extension , the extreme male brain theory , hypothesizes that autism is an extreme case of the male brain , defined psychometrically as individuals in whom systemizing is better than empathizing ; These theories are somewhat related to the earlier theory of mind approach , which hypothesizes that autistic behavior arises from an inability to ascribe mental states to oneself and others . The theory of mind hypothesis is supported by autistic children 's atypical responses to the Sally–Anne test for reasoning about others ' motivations , and the mirror neuron system theory of autism described in Pathophysiology maps well to the hypothesis . The second category focuses on nonsocial or general processing . Executive dysfunction hypothesizes that autistic behavior results in part from deficits in working memory , planning , inhibition , and other forms of executive function . A strength of the theory is predicting stereotyped behavior and narrow interests ; two weaknesses are that executive function is hard to measure and that executive function deficits have not been found in young autistic children . A related theory—enhanced perceptual functioning—focuses more on the superiority of locally oriented and perceptual operations in autistic individuals . These theories map well from the underconnectivity theory of autism . Neither category is satisfactory on its own ; social cognition theories poorly address autism 's rigid and repetitive behaviors , while the nonsocial theories have difficulty explaining social impairment and communication difficulties . A combined theory based on multiple deficits may prove to be more useful . Screening About half of parents of children with ASD notice their child 's unusual behaviors by age 18 months , and about four-fifths notice by age 24 months . Screening tools designed for one culture 's norms for behaviors like eye contact may be inappropriate for a different culture . Although genetic screening for autism is generally still impractical , it can be considered in some cases , such as children with neurological symptoms and dysmorphic features . Diagnosis Diagnosis is based on behavior , not cause or mechanism . Autism is defined in the DSM-IV-TR as exhibiting at least six symptoms total , including at least two symptoms of qualitative impairment in social interaction , at least one symptom of qualitative impairment in communication , and at least one symptom of restricted and repetitive behavior . Sample symptoms include lack of social or emotional reciprocity , stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic language , and persistent preoccupation with parts of objects . Onset must be prior to age three years , with delays or abnormal functioning in either social interaction , language as used in social communication , or symbolic or imaginative play . The disturbance must not be better accounted for by Rett syndrome or childhood disintegrative disorder . ICD-10 uses essentially the same definition . Several diagnostic instruments are available . Two are commonly used in autism research : the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised ( ADI-R ) is a semistructured parent interview , and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule ( ADOS ) uses observation and interaction with the child . The Childhood Autism Rating Scale ( CARS ) is used widely in clinical environments to assess severity of autism based on observation of children . A differential diagnosis for ASD at this stage might also consider mental retardation , hearing impairment , and a specific language impairment The presence of autism can make it harder to diagnose coexisting psychiatric disorders such as depression . Clinical genetics evaluations are often done once ASD is diagnosed , particularly when other symptoms already suggest a genetic cause . consensus guidelines in the US and UK are limited to high-resolution chromosome and fragile X testing . As new genetic tests are developed several ethical , legal , and social issues will emerge . Commercial availability of tests may precede adequate understanding of how to use test results , given the complexity of autism 's genetics . Metabolic and neuroimaging tests are sometimes helpful , but are not routine . In the UK the National Autism Plan for Children recommends at most 30 weeks from first concern to completed diagnosis and assessment , though few cases are handled that quickly in practice . A 2009 US study found the average age of formal ASD diagnosis was 5.7 years , far above recommendations , and that 27 % of children remained undiagnosed at age 8 years . Although the symptoms of autism and ASD begin early in childhood , they are sometimes missed ; years later , adults may seek diagnoses to help them or their friends and family understand themselves , to help their employers make adjustments , or in some locations to claim disability living allowances or other benefits . Underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis are problems in marginal cases , and much of the recent increase in the number of reported ASD cases is likely due to changes in diagnostic practices . The increasing popularity of drug treatment options and the expansion of benefits has given providers incentives to diagnose ASD , resulting in some overdiagnosis of children with uncertain symptoms . Conversely , the cost of screening and diagnosis and the challenge of obtaining payment can inhibit or delay diagnosis . It is particularly hard to diagnose autism among the visually impaired , partly because some of its diagnostic criteria depend on vision , and partly because autistic symptoms overlap with those of common blindness syndromes or blindisms . Management The main goals when treating children with autism are to lessen associated deficits and family distress , and to increase quality of life and functional independence . No single treatment is best and treatment is typically tailored to the child 's needs . Although many psychosocial interventions have some positive evidence , suggesting that some form of treatment is preferable to no treatment , the methodological quality of systematic reviews of these studies has generally been poor , their clinical results are mostly tentative , and there is little evidence for the relative effectiveness of treatment options . Intensive , sustained special education programs and behavior therapy early in life can help children acquire self-care , social , and job skills , and often improve functioning and decrease symptom severity and maladaptive behaviors ; claims that intervention by around age three years is crucial are not substantiated . Available approaches include applied behavior analysis ( ABA ) , developmental models , structured teaching , speech and language therapy , social skills therapy , and occupational therapy . and is well-established for improving intellectual performance of young children . The appropriateness of including children with varying severity of autism spectrum disorders in the general education population is a subject of current debate among educators and researchers . Many medications are used to treat ASD symptoms that interfere with integrating a child into home or school when behavioral treatment fails . More than half of US children diagnosed with ASD are prescribed psychoactive drugs or anticonvulsants , with the most common drug classes being antidepressants , stimulants , and antipsychotics . Aside from antipsychotics , there is scant reliable research about the effectiveness or safety of drug treatments for adolescents and adults with ASD . A person with ASD may respond atypically to medications , the medications can have adverse effects , Experiments in mice have reversed or reduced some symptoms related to autism by replacing or modulating gene function , Although many alternative therapies and interventions are available , few are supported by scientific studies . Treatment approaches have little empirical support in quality-of-life contexts , and many programs focus on success measures that lack predictive validity and real-world relevance . Some alternative treatments may place the child at risk . A 2008 study found that compared to their peers , autistic boys have significantly thinner bones if on casein-free diets ; in 2005 , botched chelation therapy killed a five-year-old child with autism . Treatment is expensive ; indirect costs are more so . For someone born in 2000 , a US study estimated an average lifetime cost of $ ( net present value in dollars , inflation-adjusted from 2003 estimate ) , with about 10 % medical care , 30 % extra education and other care , and 60 % lost economic productivity . Publicly supported programs are often inadequate or inappropriate for a given child , and unreimbursed out-of-pocket medical or therapy expenses are associated with likelihood of family financial problems ; one 2008 US study found a 14 % average loss of annual income in families of children with ASD , and a related study found that ASD is associated with higher probability that child care problems will greatly affect parental employment . US states increasingly require private health insurance to cover autism services , shifting costs from publicly funded education programs to privately funded health insurance . After childhood , key treatment issues include residential care , job training and placement , sexuality , social skills , and estate planning . Prognosis There is no known cure . Most autistic children can acquire language by age 5 or younger , though a few have developed communication skills in later years . Most children with autism lack social support , meaningful relationships , future employment opportunities or self-determination . Although core difficulties tend to persist , symptoms often become less severe with age . Acquiring language before age six , having an IQ above 50 , and having a marketable skill all predict better outcomes ; independent living is unlikely with severe autism . A 2004 British study of 68 adults who were diagnosed before 1980 as autistic children with IQ above 50 found that 12 % achieved a high level of independence as adults , 10 % had some friends and were generally in work but required some support , 19 % had some independence but were generally living at home and needed considerable support and supervision in daily living , 46 % needed specialist residential provision from facilities specializing in ASD with a high level of support and very limited autonomy , and 12 % needed high-level hospital care . A 2005 Swedish study of 78 adults that did not exclude low IQ found worse prognosis ; for example , only 4 % achieved independence . A 2008 Canadian study of 48 young adults diagnosed with ASD as preschoolers found outcomes ranging through poor ( 46 % ) , fair ( 32 % ) , good ( 17 % ) , and very good ( 4 % ) ; 56 % of these young adults had been employed at some point during their lives , mostly in volunteer , sheltered or part-time work . Changes in diagnostic practice and increased availability of effective early intervention make it unclear whether these findings can be generalized to recently diagnosed children . because of inadequate data , these numbers may underestimate ASD 's true prevalence . PDD-NOS 's prevalence has been estimated at 3.7 per 1,000 , Asperger syndrome at roughly 0.6 per 1,000 , and childhood disintegrative disorder at 0.02 per 1,000 . The number of reported cases of autism increased dramatically in the 1990s and early 2000s . This increase is largely attributable to changes in diagnostic practices , referral patterns , availability of services , age at diagnosis , and public awareness , though unidentified environmental risk factors cannot be ruled out . The available evidence does not rule out the possibility that autism 's true prevalence has increased ; The risk is greater with older fathers than with older mothers ; two potential explanations are the known increase in mutation burden in older sperm , and the hypothesis that men marry later if they carry genetic liability and show some signs of autism . Several other conditions are common in children with autism . and ASD is associated with several genetic disorders . *Mental retardation . The fraction of autistic individuals who also meet criteria for mental retardation has been reported as anywhere from 25 % to 70 % , a wide variation illustrating the difficulty of assessing autistic intelligence . For ASD other than autism , the association with mental retardation is much weaker . *Anxiety disorders are common among children with ASD ; there are no firm data , but studies have reported prevalences ranging from 11 % to 84 % . Many anxiety disorders have symptoms that are better explained by ASD itself , or are hard to distinguish from ASD 's symptoms . *Epilepsy , with variations in risk of epilepsy due to age , cognitive level , and type of language disorder . *Several metabolic defects , such as phenylketonuria , are associated with autistic symptoms . *Minor physical anomalies are significantly increased in the autistic population . *Preempted diagnoses . Although the DSM-IV rules out concurrent diagnosis of many other conditions along with autism , the full criteria for ADHD , Tourette syndrome , and other of these conditions are often present and these comorbid diagnoses are increasingly accepted . *Sleep problems affect about two-thirds of individuals with ASD at some point in childhood . These most commonly include symptoms of insomnia such as difficulty in falling asleep , frequent nocturnal awakenings , and early morning awakenings . Sleep problems are associated with difficult behaviors and family stress , and are often a focus of clinical attention over and above the primary ASD diagnosis . History A few examples of autistic symptoms and treatments were described long before autism was named . The Table Talk of Martin Luther , compiled by his notetaker , Mathesius , contains the story of a 12-year-old boy who may have been severely autistic . Luther reportedly thought the boy was a soulless mass of flesh possessed by the devil , and suggested that he be suffocated , although a later critic has cast doubt on the veracity of this report . The earliest well-documented case of autism is that of Hugh Blair of Borgue , as detailed in a 1747 court case in which his brother successfully petitioned to annul Blair 's marriage to gain Blair 's inheritance . The Wild Boy of Aveyron , a feral child caught in 1798 , showed several signs of autism ; the medical student Jean Itard treated him with a behavioral program designed to help him form social attachments and to induce speech via imitation . The New Latin word autismus ( English translation autism ) was coined by the Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler in 1910 as he was defining symptoms of schizophrenia . He derived it from the Greek word autós ( αὐτός , meaning self ) , and used it to mean morbid self-admiration , referring to " autistic withdrawal of the patient to his fantasies , against which any influence from outside becomes an intolerable disturbance " . The word autism first took its modern sense in 1938 when Hans Asperger of the Vienna University Hospital adopted Bleuler 's terminology autistic psychopaths in a lecture in German about child psychology . Asperger was investigating an ASD now known as Asperger syndrome , though for various reasons it was not widely recognized as a separate diagnosis until 1981. Almost all the characteristics described in Kanner 's first paper on the subject , notably " autistic aloneness " and " insistence on sameness " , are still regarded as typical of the autistic spectrum of disorders . Kanner 's reuse of autism led to decades of confused terminology like infantile schizophrenia , and child psychiatry 's focus on maternal deprivation led to misconceptions of autism as an infant 's response to " refrigerator mothers " . Starting in the late 1960s autism was established as a separate syndrome by demonstrating that it is lifelong , distinguishing it from mental retardation and schizophrenia and from other developmental disorders , and demonstrating the benefits of involving parents in active programs of therapy . As late as the mid-1970s there was little evidence of a genetic role in autism ; now it is thought to be one of the most heritable of all psychiatric conditions . Although the rise of parent organizations and the destigmatization of childhood ASD have deeply affected how we view ASD , and many primary care physicians and medical specialists still express some beliefs consistent with outdated autism research . The Internet has helped autistic individuals bypass nonverbal cues and emotional sharing that they find so hard to deal with , and has given them a way to form online communities and work remotely . Sociological and cultural aspects of autism have developed : some in the community seek a cure , while others believe that autism is simply another way of being .
