 There are several traditions of astrology including Western Astrology , Hindu astrology and Chinese astrology . Astrology’s origins trace to the third millennium BCE . Ancient civilizations developed it as a calendrical system to predict seasonal shifts and to interpret celestial cycles as signs of divine communications . Historically it was an scholarly tradition , sustained in courts , cultural centers and universities , and was closely related to the studies of astronomy , alchemy , meteorology , and medicine . Astrology and astronomy parted ways at the end of the 17th century , when new discoveries in astronomy such as heliocentrism redefined many of the concepts that the two disciplines had previously shared . Subsequently , astrology suffered a decline in academic and theoretical credibility . The 20th century brought renewed attention , partly through the popularizing effect of newspaper horoscopes and New Age philosophies . While astrology may bear a superficial resemblance to science , it is a pseudoscience because it makes little attempt to develop solutions to its problems , shows no concern for the evaluation of competing theories , and is selective in considering confirmations and dis-confirmations . Etymology The word p.911 . Historically , the word star has had a loose definition , by which it can refer to planets or any luminous celestial object . The notion of it signifying all heavenly bodies is evident in early Babylonian astrology where cuneiform depictions for the determinative MUL ( star ) present a symbol of stars alongside planetary and other stellar references to indicate deified objects which reside in the heavens . The word planet ( based on the Greek verb { { lang|grc | II . iv , p.177 . The seven Classical planets therefore comprise the Sun and Moon along with the solar-system planets that are visible to the naked eye : Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn . This remained the standard definition of the word 'planet ' until the discovery of Uranus in 1781 created a need for revision . Although the modern IAU definition of planet does not include the Sun and the Moon , astrology retains historical convention in its description of those astronomical bodies , and also generally maintains reference to Pluto as being an astrological planet . Varieties of Astrology Western Astrology is founded on the movements and relative positions of celestial bodies such as the Sun , Moon , and planets , which are analyzed by their aspects ( angles ) relative to one another . These are usually considered by their placement in houses ( spatial divisions of the sky ) , and their movement through signs of the zodiac ( spatial divisions of the ecliptic ) . Western astrology is largely horoscopic , that is , it is a form of divination based on the construction of a horoscope for an exact moment , such as a person 's birth , in which various cosmic bodies are said to have an influence . Hindu astrology is founded on the notion of bandhu of the Vedas , ( scriptures ) , which is the connection between the microcosm and the macrocosm . Practice relies primarily on the sidereal zodiac , which is different from the tropical zodiac used in Western ( Hellenistic ) astrology in that an ayanamsa adjustment is made for the gradual precession of the vernal equinox . Hindu astrology includes several nuanced sub-systems of interpretation and prediction with elements not found in Hellenistic astrology , such as its system of lunar mansions ( nakshatras ) . Chinese astrology has a close relation with Chinese philosophy ( theory of the three harmony , heaven , earth and water ) and different " principles " to Western : the wu xing teachings , yin and yang , astronomy : five planet , the 10 Celestial stems , the 12 Earthly Branches , the lunisolar calendar ( moon calendar and sun calendar ) , the time calculation after year , month , day and shichen ( 時辰 ) . The zodiac of twelve animal signs represents twelve different types of personality . The zodiac traditionally begins with the sign of the Rat , and goes on to 12 other animals such as the Tiger Core Principles A central principle of astrology is integration within the cosmos . The individual , Earth , and its environment are viewed as a single organism , all parts of which are correlated with each other . Cycles of change that are observed in the heavens are therefore reflective ( not causative ) of similar cycles of change observed on earth and within the individual . This relationship is expressed in the Hermetic maxim " as above , so below ; as below , so above " , which postulates symmetry between the individual as a microcosm and the celestial environment as a macrocosm . Accordingly , the natal horoscope depicts a stylized map of the universe at the time of birth , specifically focussed on the individual at its centre , with the Sun , Moon , and celestial bodies considered to be that individual’s personal planets or stars , which are uniquely relevant to that individual alone . At the heart of astrology is the metaphysical principle that mathematical relationships express qualities or ‘ tones ' of energy which manifest in numbers , visual angles , shapes and sounds – all connected within a pattern of proportion . Pythagoras first identified that the pitch of a musical note is in proportion to the length of the string that produces it , and that intervals between harmonious sound frequencies form simple numerical ratios . In a theory known as the Harmony of the Spheres , Pythagoras proposed that the Sun , Moon and planets all emit their own unique hum based on their orbital revolution , and that the quality of life on Earth reflects the tenor of celestial sounds which are physically imperceptible to the human ear . Later philosophers retained the close association between astronomy , optics , music and astrology , including Ptolemy , who wrote influential texts on all these topics . Alkindi , in the 9th century , developed Ptolemy 's ideas in De Aspectibus which explores many points of relevance to astrology and the use of planetary aspects . In the 17th century , Kepler , also influenced by arguments in Ptolemy’s Optics and Harmonica , compiled his Harmonices Mundi ( 'Harmony of the World ' ) , which presented his own analysis of optical perceptions , geometrical shapes , musical consonances and planetary harmonies . Kepler regarded this text as the most important work of his career , and the fifth part , concerning the role of planetary harmony in Creation , the crown of it . His premise was that , as an integral part of Universal Law , mathematical harmony is the key that binds all parts together : one theoretical proposition from his work introduced the minor planetary aspects into astrology ; another introduced Kepler’s third law of planetary motion into astronomy . Another core principle is exemplified by an astrological maxim used by the leader of early modern science , Francis Bacon : " The last rule ( which has always been held by the wiser astrologers ) is that there is no fatal necessity in the stars ; but that they rather incline than compel " . Bacon advocated an emphasis on what he called " sane astrology " based on the study of subtle influences that " lie concealed in the depths of Physic " . His arguments reflect how astrology has always involved consideration of the psyche , a more recent expression of which can be found in the writings of Carl Jung and the development of modern psychological astrology . History Ancient world Astrology , before its differentiation from astronomy , began when humans started to measure , record , and predict seasonal changes by reference to astronomical cycles . Early evidence of this appears as markings on bones and cave walls , which show lunar cycles were being noted as early as 25,000 years ago . These were the first steps towards recording the Moon’s influence upon tides and rivers , and towards organizing a communal calendar . Agricultural needs were also met by increasing knowledge of constellations , whose appearances change with the seasons , allowing the rising of particular star-groups to herald annual floods or seasonal activities . By the third millennium BCE , widespread civilizations had developed sophisticated awareness of celestial cycles , and are believed to have consciously oriented their temples to create alignment with the heliacal risings of the stars . There is scattered evidence to suggest that the oldest known astrological references are copies of texts made during this period . Two , from the Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa ( compiled in Babylon round 1700 BCE ) are reported to have been made during the reign of king Sargon of Akkad ( 2334-2279 BCE ) . Another , showing an early use of electional astrology , is ascribed to the reign of the Sumerian ruler Gudea of Lagash ( ca . 2144-2124 BCE ) . This describes how the gods revealed to him in a dream the constellations that would be most favorable for the planned construction of a temple . However , there is controversy about whether they were genuinely recorded at the time or merely ascribed to ancient rulers by posterity . The oldest undisputed evidence of the use of astrology as an integrated system of knowledge is therefore attributed to the records of the first dynasty of Mesopotamia ( 1950-1651 BCE ) . Byzantine and early medieval Islamic astrology . Other important Arabic astrologers include Albumasur and Al Khwarizmi , the Persian mathematician , astronomer and astrologer , who is considered the father of algebra and the algorithm . The Arabs greatly increased the knowledge of astronomical cycles , and many of the star names that remain in common use today , such as Aldebaran , Altair , Betelgeuse , Rigel and Vega retain the legacy of their language . Modern era Early in the 20th century , Carl Jung , the founder of analytical psychology , developed sophisticated theories concerning astrology . These included concepts such as archetypes , the collective unconscious and with the collaboration of pioneer theoretical physicist ( and Nobel laureate ) , Wolfgang Pauli , synchronicity . Astrologers like Dane Rudhyar pursued a similar path to Jung and others such as Liz Greene and Stephen Arroyo were influenced by the Jungian model leading to the development of psychological astrology . During the middle of the 20th century , Alfred Witte and , following him , Reinhold Ebertin pioneered the use of midpoints , called midpoint astrology in horoscopic analysis . A new kind of locational astrology began in 1957–58 , when Donald Bradley published a hand-plotted geographic astrology map . In the 1970s , American astrologer Jim Lewis developed this technique under the name of Astro*Carto*Graphy . The world map displays lines where the Sun , Moon , planets and other celestial points appear to be on any of the Four Angles ( Rising , Setting , MC and IC ) at a given moment in time . By comparing these lines with the horoscope , an astrologer attempts to identify the potential in any location . World traditions of astrology Although most cultural systems of astrology share common roots in ancient philosophies that influenced each other , many have unique methodologies which differ from those developed in the west . Outside of western astrology , the two most significant of these are Hindu astrology ( also known as " Indian astrology " and in modern times referred to as " Vedic astrology " ) and Chinese astrology . Both of these systems have yielded great influence upon the world 's cultural history . Western Western astrology is largely horoscopic , that is , it is a form of divination based on the construction of a horoscope for an exact moment , such as a person 's birth , in which various cosmic bodies are said to have an influence . Astrology in western popular culture is often reduced to sun sign astrology , which considers only the individual 's date of birth ( i. e. the " position of the Sun " at that date ) . Hindu Hindu astrology uses a different zodiac than Western astrology and is a branch of Vedic science . In India , there is a long-established widespread belief in astrology , and it is commonly used for daily life , foremost with regard to marriages , and secondarily with regard to career and electional and karmic astrology . In the 1960s , H. R. Seshadri Iyer , introduced a system including the concepts of yogi and avayogi . It generated interest with research oriented astrologers in the West . From the early 1990s , Western Vedic astrologer and author V. K. Choudhry created and developed the Systems ' Approach for Interpreting Horoscopes , a simplified system of Jyotish ( predictive astrology ) The system , also known as " SA " , helps those who are trying to learn Jyotisha . The late K. S. Krishnamurti developed the Krishnamurti Paddhati system based on the analysis of the stars ( nakshatras ) , by sub-dividing the stars in the ratio of the dasha of the concerned planets . The system is also known as " KP " and " sub theory " . In 2001 , Indian scientists and politicians debated and critiqued a proposal to use state money to fund research into astrology . In February , 2001 , the science of vedic astrology , Jyotir Vigyan , was introduced into the curriculum of Indian universities . The astrology commonly used in Sri Lanka derives from Vedic astrology , with some modifications to bring it in line with Buddhist teachings . Tibetan astrology is also largely based on Vedic astrology with some modifications relating to Buddhism . Chinese Chinese astrology has a close relation with Chinese philosophy ( theory of the three harmony , heaven , earth and water ) and different " principles " to Western : the wu xing teachings , yin and yang , astronomy : five planet , the 10 Celestial stems , the 12 Earthly Branches , the lunisolar calendar ( moon calendar and sun calendar ) , the time calculation after year , month , day and shichen ( 時辰 ) . The Chinese zodiac of twelve animal signs represents twelve different types of personality . The zodiac traditionally begins with the sign of the Rat , and there are many stories about the Origins of the Chinese Zodiac which explain why this is so ( see below ) . The following are the twelve zodiac signs in order and their characteristics . Cultural influence Belief in astrology holds firm today in many parts of the world : in one poll , 31 % of Americans expressed belief in astrology and according to another study 39 % considered it scientific . According to Gallup opinion polls , around 25 % of adults in the UK and US accept that astrology or the position of the stars and planets affect people’s lives , whilst other sources report the figure to be much higher . Astrology has had an influence on both language and literature . For example , influenza , from medieval Latin influentia 'influence ' , was so named because doctors once believed epidemics to be caused by unfavourable celestial influences . The word disaster comes from the Greek δυσαστρία , disastria , derived from the negative prefix δυσ- , dis- and αστήρ , aster 'star ' , meaning not-starred or badly-starred . The adjectives lunatic ( Luna/Moon ) , mercurial ( Mercury ) , venereal ( Venus ) , martial ( Mars ) , jovial ( Jupiter/Jove ) , and saturnine ( Saturn ) are all used to describe personal qualities thought to be influenced by the astrological characteristics of predominating personal planets . In literature many writers , such as Chaucer and Shakespeare , used astrological symbolism to add subtlety and nuance to the description of their characters ' motivations . More recently , Michael Ward has proposed that C. S. Lewis imbued his Chronicles of Narnia with the characteristics and symbols of the seven planets that govern the heavens in medieval astrology . In 1978 , notes from Margaret Mitchell’s library revealed that she had based each character from her classic prize-winning novel , Gone with the Wind ( 1936 ) , including the central star-crossed lovers , Scarlett ( Aries ) and Rhett ( Leo ) , around an archetype of the zodiac . In 2010 , a detailed personal horoscope analyzed and illustrated by J. K. Rowling at the time she was writing her first Harry Potter novel , came up for sale . The auctioneer commented that Rowling “ displays a detailed knowledge of Western astrology which was later to play an important part in her books " . Often , an understanding of astrological symbolism is needed to fully appreciate such literature . In music the best known example of astrology 's influence is in the orchestral suite The Planets by British composer Gustav Holst , the framework of which is based on the astrological tones and signatures of the planets . In politics , in 1981 , after John Hinckley 's attempted assassination of President Reagan , first lady Nancy Reagan commissioned astrologer Joan Quigley to act as the secret White House astrologer . However , Quigley 's role ended in 1988 when it became public through the memoirs of former chief of staff , Donald Regan . Scientific appraisal Astrology has not been considered a science since the 18th century . It has been the subject of several research studies , none of which have yielded any convincing evidence of the scientific validity of the claims of its proponents . Methods Practitioners have looked for correspondences between the long term revolutions of planetary alignments and recurrent historic cultural themes . Theodor Landscheidt coined the term cosmic cybernetics for a method that he claims compares the harmonic frequencies and structures of planetary positions to statistical evaluations of data , including economic indexes . Others have applied computer modeling techniques to investigate trends . Gauquelin 's research In 1955 , Michel Gauquelin stated that although he had failed to find evidence to support such indicators as the zodiacal signs and planetary aspects in astrology , he had found positive correlations between the diurnal positions of some of the planets and success in professions ( such as doctors , scientists , athletes , actors , writers , painters , etc. ) which astrology traditionally associates with those planets . Gauquelin and other supporters claim that the Mars effect is not due to astronomical or demographic artifacts , that the methodologies were free from error , that studies of independently collected data demonstrated the effect , that birth-time shuffle tests supported the presence of the effect , that the Mars effect is not found in ordinary people , and that the effect cannot be explained by data selection bias . Carlson 's experiment A different approach to testing astrology quantitatively uses blind experiment . The most renowned of these is Shawn Carlson 's double-blind chart matching tests in which he challenged 28 astrologers to match over 100 natal charts to psychological profiles generated by the California Psychological Inventory ( CPI ) test . When Carlson 's study was published in Nature in 1985 , his conclusion was that natal astrology as practiced by reputable astrologers was no better than chance . Scientific criticism Contemporary scientists consider astrology a pseudoscience . Criticisms include that astrology is conjectural and supplies no hypotheses , proves difficult to falsify , and describes natural events in terms of scientifically untestable supernatural causes such as divination . It has also been suggested that much of the continued faith in astrology could be psychologically explained as a matter of cognitive bias . Skeptics say that the practice of western astrologers allows them to avoid making verifiable predictions , and gives them the ability to attach significance to arbitrary and unrelated events , in a way that suits their purpose , although science also provides methodologies to separate verifiable significance from arbitrary predictions in research experiments , as demonstrated by Gauquelin 's research and Carlson 's experiment . Astrology has been criticized for failing to provide a physical mechanism that links the movements of celestial bodies to their purported effects on human behavior . In 1975 , amid increasing popular interest in astrology , The Humanist magazine presented a rebuttal of astrology in a statement put together by Bart J. Bok , Lawrence E. Jerome , and Paul Kurtz . The statement , entitled ‘ Objections to Astrology ’ , was signed by 186 astronomers , physicists and leading scientists of the day . They said that there is no scientific foundation for the tenets of astrology and warned the public against accepting astrological advice without question . Their criticism focused on the fact that there was no mechanism whereby astrological effects might occur : Astronomer Carl Sagan declined to sign the statement . For this reason , his words have been quoted by those who argue that astrology retains some sort of scientific validity . Sagan said he took this stance not because he thought astrology had any validity at all , but because he thought that the tone of the statement was authoritarian , and that dismissing astrology because there was no mechanism ( while " certainly a relevant point " ) was not in itself convincing . In a letter published in a follow-up edition of The Humanist , Sagan confirmed that he would have been willing to sign such a statement had it described and refuted the principal tenets of astrological belief . This , he argued , would have been more persuasive and would have produced less controversy . Astrologers for their part prefer not to attempt to explain astrology , or give it supernatural explanations such as divination or synchronicity . Others have proposed conventional causal agents such as electro-magnetism within an intricate web of planetary fields and resonances in the solar system . Scientists dismiss magnetism as an implausible explanation , since the magnetic field of a large but distant planet such as Jupiter is far smaller than that produced by ordinary household appliances . In a lecture in 2001 , Stephen Hawking stated " The reason most scientists do n't believe in astrology is because it is not consistent with our theories that have been tested by experiment . " Astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson asserted that " astrology was discredited 600 years ago with the birth of modern science . 'To teach it as though you are contributing to the fundamental knowledge of an informed electorate is astonishing in this , the 21st century ' . Education should be about knowing how to think , 'And part of knowing how to think is knowing how the laws of nature shape the world around us . Without that knowledge , without that capacity to think , you can easily become a victim of people who seek to take advantage of you . The founder of the Astrological Institute to which Tyson 's criticism was directed responded " It 's quite obvious that he has n't studied the subject . " Theological criticism Some of the practices of astrology were refuted on theological grounds by medieval Muslim astronomers such as Al-Farabi ( Alpharabius ) , Ibn al-Haytham ( Alhazen ) and Avicenna . Their criticisms argued that the methods of astrologers conflicted with orthodox religious views of Islamic scholars through the suggestion that the Will of God can be known and predicted in advance . Such refutations mainly concerned " judicial branches " ( such as Horary astrology ) , rather than the more " natural branches " such as Medical and Meteorological astrology , these being seen as part of the natural sciences of the time . For example , Avicenna’s 'Refutation against astrology ' Resāla fī ebṭāl aḥkām al-nojūm , argues against the practice of astrology while supporting the principle of planets acting as the agents of divine causation which express God 's absolute power over creation . Avicenna considered that the movement of the planets influenced life on earth in a deterministic way , but argued against the capability of determining the exact influence of the stars . In essence , Avicenna did not refute the essential dogma of astrology , but denied our ability to understand it to the extent that precise and fatalistic predictions could be made from it . Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya ( 1292–1350 ) , in his Miftah Dar al-SaCadah , also used physical arguments in astronomy to question the practice of judicial astrology . He recognized that the stars are much larger than the planets , and argued : Education Education in astrology is offered in a number of countries of the world : United States In the United States , astrological education is offered at institutions such as Kepler College , a liberal arts college with an emphasis on astrology in Lynnwood , Washington , near Seattle , which opened in 2001 and awarded its first 8 Bachelor of Arts degrees in Astrological Studies in 2004. Students attending Kepler College after March 9 , 2010 , however , unless they are completing a course of study , are not awarded degrees but certificates of completion of a course of study . The degrees granted by Kepler are not recognized by national or regional accrediting agencies . Other astrological organizations offer study programs and correspondence courses which , after examination , certifies astrologers . United Kingdom In the United Kingdom , astrological education is offered at a number of institutions , some offering a diploma upon completion of the course and an examination . In addition , the University of Wales Trinity Saint David at Lampeter offers an MA in Cultural Astronomy and Astrology . India In February , 2001 , the " science " of vedic astrology , Jyotish Vigyan , was introduced into the curriculum of Indian universities . Undergraduate ( called " graduate " in India ) post-graduate and research courses of study were established . " Beneficiaries of these courses would be students , teachers , professionals from modern streams like doctors , architects , marketing , financial , economic and political analysts , etc. " Some astrological organizations offer certification for astrologers . Notes   Babylonian planet names took a multitude of deity forms , most drawn from one basic deity association ; for example , the basic association of Mars was with the war-god Nergal , for whom it expressed representation as the ‘ the star of Nergal ’ . Some 'traditional astrologers ' prefer to work only with the seven Classical planets , but most modern astrologers include reference to Uranus ( discovered in 1781 ) , Neptune ( 1846 ) and Pluto ( 1930 ) . It is therefore conventional for astrology texts to refer to ten planets , which does not include the Earth . These , with their astrological symbols , are as follows :
